Hapl-O-mat -- Getting started
=============================


Introduction
------------
Hapl-O-mat is a software coded in C++ for HLA haplotype inference.
Besides estimating haplotype frequencies via an expectation-maximization
algorithm, it is capable of processing HLA genotype population data. This
includes translation of alleles between various allele groups and resolving
allelic and genotypic ambigiuites.Both common formats for recording
HLA genotypes, multiple allele codes and genotype list strings, are supported.

This guide explains how to use Hapl-O-mat. It is divided into the following
sections:

1) Data preparation
2) Input formats
3) Parameters
4) Run Hapl-O-mat
5) Tutorials

For more information refer to our publication on Hapl-O-mat:
INSERT ARTICLE


1) Data preparation
-------------------
The estimation of HLA haplotypes is based on the HLA nomenclature. Information
on the nomenclature has to be provided as input. You can create this information
on your own by following the instructions in prepareData/README. Alternatively,
you can download a current version of the data from INSERT LINK. Hapl-O-mat relies
on the following files:

   allAllelesExpanded.txt: A list of relevant existing HLA alleles with their
   enclosed more-digits allele groups.

   H1g.txt: A list of g-groups with their enclosed 8-digits groups.

   H1.txt: A list of G-groups with their enclosed 8-digits groups.

   P.txt: A list of P-groups with their enclosed 8-digits groups.

   code2dna.txt: A list of multiple allele codes.

   H2.txt: Basis for the H2 filter.

   alleleList.txt: If your input data includes a missing single-locus genotype,
   it can be replaced by combining all alleles of the same locus from this file.

The most common HLA loci (HLA-A, B, C, DPA1, DPB1, DQA1, DQB1, DRB1, DRB3, DRB4,
and DRB5) are included in the files. In order to incorporate further loci follow
the instructions in prepareData/README.


2) Input formats
----------------
Hapl-O-mat distinguishes four input formats, which differ in the way the input
population data is recorded. Examples for input data can be found in the
tutorials.

    MA: Ambiguites are encoded by multiple allele (MA) codes. Except for the
    first line, input files hold an indivdiual's identifaction number and
    genotype per line. Genotypes are saved allele by allele, where the locus of
    the allele is removed. Identification number and alleles are TAB-separated.
    The first line of the file is a header file indicating the name of the first
    column and the loci of the other columns. Same loci must be placed next to
    each other.  

    GLC: Genotypes with or without ambiguities are saved by genotype list (GL)
    strings. Input files hold an indivdiual's identifaction number and genotype
    per line. Identification number and single-locus genotypes are TAB-separated.

    GL: Genotypes with or without ambiguities are saved by genotype list (GL)
    strings. Population data is saved in two files. The pull-file contains an
    invidual's identification number and a list of integer numbers, GL-ids,
    referring to its single-locus genotype. The GL-ids are separated from the
    identification number via ";" and, from each other via ":". The second file,
    the glid file, contains a translation from GL-ids starting with "1" to actual
    single-locus genotypes. GL-id and genotype are separated via ";". A GL-id of
    "0" is interpreted as a missing typing at the corresponding locus and does 
    not require a translation in the glid file.

    READ: Processing population data, Hapl-O-mat writes resolved genotypes to
    disk. The created file can be used as input avoiding resolving genotypes a
    second time.    


3) Parameters
-------------
Each input format requires a different set of parameters. All input formats have
the following parameters in common:

    FILENAME_HAPLOTYPES: Name of the file which temporarily saves haplotype names.

    FILENAME_PHENOTYPES: Name of the file which saves resolved genotypes.

    FILENAME_HAPLOTYPEFREQUENCIES: Name of the file which saves estimated
    haplotype frequencies.

    FILENAME_EPSILON: Name of the file which saves stopping criterion and 
    log-likelihood per iteration.

    INITIALISATION_HAPLOTYPE_FREQUENCIES: Initialization routine for
    haplotype frequencies. It takes the following values:
    "equal": All haplotype frequencies are initialized with the same frequency.
    "numberOccurence": Haplotype frequencies are initialized according to their
    initial number of occurence.
    "random": Haplotype frequencies are initialized randomly.
    "perturbation": Haplotype frequencies are initialized as in numberOccurence 
    and then randomly modified by a small (<10%) offset.

    EPSILON: Value for the stopping criterion, i.e. the maximal change between
    consecutive haplotype frequency estimations is smaller than the assigned
    value.

    CUT_HAPLOTYPEFREQUENCIES: Estimated haplotype frequencies smaller than this
    value are removed from the output.

    RENORMALISE_HAPLOTYPE_FREQUENCIES: Takes values "true" and "false". If 
    "true", normalise estimated haplotype frequencies to sum to one. Within
    machine precision, this becomes necessary, if estimated haplotypes are
    removed, e.g. via the option CUT_HAPLOTYPEFREQUENCIES.

    SEED: Set the seed of the used pseudo random number generator. If set to "0",
    the seed is initialized by the system time.

The parameters are saved in the corresponding files parametersMA, parametersGLC,
parametersGL, and parametersREAD. Dependent on the input format, additional
parameters are:

    FILENAME_INPUT (MA, GLC, READ): The file name of the input population data.

    FILENAME_PULL (GL): The file name of the pull-file.

    FILENAME_GLID (GL): The file name of the glid-file.

    LOCI_AND_ALLELEGROUPS (MA, GL, GLC): Loci included into analysis and desired
    allele group per locus. The list is separated by "," and contains the locus
    name followed by ":" and the desired allele group. Supported allele groups
    and their abbreviations are g-groups (g), P-groups (P), G-groups (G),
    4-digits groups (4d), 6-digits groups(6d), and 8-digits groups(8d). Alleles
    are not translated via the option asItIs (applying the H2 filter includes an
    intrinsic translation to G-groups).

    LOCIORDER (GL): Specify the order of loci the individual's GL-ids correspond
    to. Loci are separated via ",".

    RESOLVE_UNKNOWN_GENOTYPE(GL): Takes values "true" and "false". If set to
    true, missing typings are replaced by a combination of all alleles from 
    alleleList.txt at the locus. Else, individuals with a missing typing are
    discarded from analysis.

    MINIMAL_FREQUENCY_PHENOTYPES (MA, GL, GLC): Resolved genotypes with a
    frequency below this threshold are excluded from analysis.

    DO_H2FILTER (MA, GL, GLC): Takes values "true" and "false". The option "true"
    activates the H2 filter.

    EXPAND_H2LINES (MA, GL, GLC): Takes values "true" and "false". If set to
    "true", matching lines with additional genotype pairs in the H2 filter are
    allowed.

Whenever specifying a file name including folders, you have to create the folders
on your own.


4) Run Hapl-O-mat
-----------------

After preparing input data of the format INPUTFORMAT (MA, GLC, GL, READ),
Hapl-O-mat is run by

      ./haplomat INPUTFORMAT


5) Tutorials
------------

a) You find the relevant population data in Tutorials/a/populationData_a.dat. It
   consists of 100 individuals typed for loci HLA-A, -B, -C, -DPB1, -DQB1, and 
   -DRB1 with varying allele resolution. As ambiguities are recorded as multipe
   allele codes, the input format is MA. We are going to infer three locus (A, B,
   DRB1) haplotypes from this data. Alleles at loci A and B shall be translated to
   allele groups g and alleles at locus DRB1 to 4-digits allele groups.

   Preparations
   - Provide the data required by Hapl-O-mat by copying the folder Tutorials/data
   to folder Tutorials/a

   - Copy the executable haplomat to Tutorials/a

   - Copy parametersMA to Tutorials/a

   Parameters
     - Set the following file names:
       - input data via FILENAME_INPUT=populationData_a.dat 
       - temporary file for haplotypes via FILENAME_HAPLOTYPES=run/haplotypes.dat
       - file with resolved genotypes via FILENAME_PHENOTYPES=run/genotypes.dat
       - file with estimated haplotype frequencies via 
         FILENAME_HAPLOTYPEFREQUENCIES=run/hfs.dat
       - file for stopping criterion and log-likelihood via 
       	 FILENAME_EPSILON=run/epsilon.dat
     
     - Set the loci to study together with the associated allele group via
       LOCI_AND_ALLELEGROUPS=A:g,B:g,DRB1:4d
     
     - Set the threshold frequency for discarding resolved genotypes to 0.00001
       via MINIMAL_FREQUENCY_PHENOTYPES=1e-5 (0.00001 also works)
     
     - Deactivate the H2 filter by setting DO_H2FILTER=false and 
       EXPAND_H2LINES=false  
     
     - Initialize haplotype frequencies randomly by setting
       INITIALISATION_HAPLOTYPE_FREQUENCIES=random
     
     - Set the stopping criterion via EPSILON=1e-5
     
     - Let Hapl-O-mat discard haplotypes with a frequency lower 1e-5 via setting
       CUT_HAPLOTYPEFREQUENCIES=1e-5
     
     - Hapl-O-mat normalizes estimated haplotype frequencies by setting
       RENORMALISE_HAPLOTYPE_FREQUENCIES=true
     
     - Set the seed for the random number generator via SEED=1000

     - Create the folder run.

   Run Haplomat  
     - Run Hapl-O-mat via ./haplomat MA

   Results
     - Examine the resolved genotypes in run/genotypes.dat. The first column
       corresponds to the individual's identification number. The second column	
       indicates how ambiguities in single-locus genotypes have been resolved.
       The third column gives the frequency of the genotype and the fourth
       column the genotype itself. If an individual's genotype splits into a set
       of genotypes, each genotype is written to one line starting with the same
       identification number. The corresponding frequencies become non-integer
       and sum to one. 
     - The evolution of the stopping criterion and log-likelihood during
       consecutive iterations is written to run/epsilon.dat. The first column is
       the stopping criterion and the second one the log-likeliehood.
     - The inferred haplotypes including estimated frequencies are listed in 
       run/hfs.dat.

b) This time ambiguities in the genotypic population data are recorded via genotype
   list strings. As all the information is in one file, the input format is
   GLC. Running Hapl-O-mat works exactly as in tutorial a). Just copy parametersGLC
   instead of parametersMA (the content is the same).

c) Again, ambiguities in the genotypic population data are recorded via genotype
   list strings. Since the data is saved in two different files, the input format
   is GL. Follow the steps from tutorial a), but use the parameter file
   parametersGL. It has the additional option RESOLVE_UNKNOWN_GENOTYPE, which we 
   set to "false". Furthermore, we have to specify the loci order. The first
   individual from populationData_c.pull has GL-ids 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. We know
   from populationData_c.pull that they correspond to loci B, A, DPB1, DRB1, C, 
   and DQB1, respectively. Because of that we set LOCIORDER=B,A,DPB1,DRB1,C,DQB1. 
   
d) Finally, we test the input format READ. To this end copy one of the files
   genotypes.dat from tutorial a), b), or c) to Tutorials/d. Additionally, copy
   haplomat, data, and parametersREAD to the same folder. Since no genotype data
   has to be resolved, the parameter file contains no parameters associated with
   data processing. Choose a set of parameters and run Hapl-O-mat.
